# ZonationR

[![ZonationR
website](reference/figures/logo.png)](https://thiago-cav.github.io/ZonationR/)

*ZonationR* is an R package that provides an interface to easily
integrate and execute Zonation 5 software directly from R. The package
was developed to support teaching and learning, making it easier for R
users to get started with Zonation 5 and learn spatial prioritization
techniques. It also facilitates efficient spatial prioritization
workflows, improving both reproducibility and automation.

## Installation

You can install the development version of *ZonationR* from
[GitHub](https://github.com/thiago-cav/ZonationR) with:

``` r
if (!require(devtools)) install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("thiago-cav/ZonationR")
```

## Before you begin

*ZonationR* is an interface to Zonation 5, which means that Zonation
must be able to read and write files on disk. To ensure this works
smoothly, it is recommended that you run the analysis inside an **R
project** whose directory is writable.

Before running the examples below, please make sure that:

- **Zonation 5 is installed** on your system  
- You know the **path to the Zonation 5 installation directory**  
- Your **current R project directory is writable**

All input and output files generated by *ZonationR* will be created
within the current R project directory.

## Getting started

This is a basic example to get a setup running with *ZonationR*. All
files are created within the current R project, and the biodiversity
input data used here are provided with the package.

``` r
# Load necessary libraries
library(ZonationR)
```

### Prepare input data

First, we copy the example biodiversity data provided with the package
into a local directory. These raster layers will be used as features in
the Zonation analysis.

``` r
#----------------------------------------------------
# Create a folder for biodiversity input data
#----------------------------------------------------
dir.create("biodiversity", showWarnings = FALSE)

extdata_path <- system.file("extdata", "biodiversity", package = "ZonationR")
file.copy(list.files(extdata_path, full.names = TRUE),
          "biodiversity", overwrite = TRUE)
```

### Zonation 5 setup

Next, we create the three compulsory input files required by Zonation 5.
The `zonation_path` argument must point to the directory where Zonation
5 is installed on your system.

``` r
# Create feature list file
feature_list(spp_file_dir = "biodiversity")

# Create settings file
settings_file(feature_list_file = "feature_list.txt")

# Create the Zonation command file
command_file(zonation_path = "C:/Program Files (x86)/Zonation5")
```

### Run the prioritization

Finally, we run the Zonation 5 analysis. All outputs will be written to
the project directory following the standard Zonation folder structure.

``` r
run_command_file(".")
```
